The Project Gutenberg EBook of San Antonio, by Claude B. Aniol

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: San Antonio
       City of Missions

Author: Claude B. Aniol

Release Date: July 7, 2016 [EBook #52516]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAN ANTONIO ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






  [Illustration: MISSION SAN JOSE]

  [Illustration: THE ALAMO]

  [Illustration: San Antonio, City of Missions]




                             _San Antonio_
                            CITY OF MISSIONS


                           By CLAUDE B. ANIOL

                             HASTINGS HOUSE
                         PUBLISHERS    NEW YORK

                  COPYRIGHT, 1942, BY CLAUDE B. ANIOL
                         PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.

  [Illustration: Entrance to the Alamo]




                              San Antonio


From a village of _Tejas_ Indians has grown the modern city of San
Antonio ... not completely modern, for there still remain many evidences
of the past, even though towering skyscrapers mark the city as
progressive and prosperous. San Antonio is filled with picturesque charm
and interesting contrasts. Off busy downtown streets one will find in
bold relief buildings, as well as customs, that date back to times when
the city was settled by Spanish conquistadors.

The Spanish, fearing encroachment in Texas by the French in the late
seventeenth century, set out to make good their original claims by
establishing forts and missions in East Texas. Captain Don Domingo Teran
de los Rios was named governor of the new Spanish dominion and, in 1691
during a journey across Texas accompanied by Father Damian Massanet,
missionary and explorer, paused here at an Indian Village. Mass was said
on the site, a great many salutes were fired, and the place was named
“San Antonio”.

No permanent settlement was established, however, but later other
expeditions passing this way encamped here. The French explorer and
trader, Louis Juchereau de Saint Dennis, claiming his interest to be the
establishment of trade relations between Louisiana and Mexico, stopped
near the headwaters of the San Antonio River in 1714, admired the charms
of the place, and declared the location to be an ideal spot for founding
a permanent community. St. Dennis’ activity in the area aroused the
Spanish authorities. Rivalry for the possessions of Texas broke out
anew.

In 1718 the Spanish viceroy, desiring a point midway between the East
Texas Missions and the Spanish Presidio of northern Mexico, established
here as a fortress the Royal Presidio of _San Antonio de Bejar_, and
founded the mission _San Antonio de Valero_ (The Alamo).

This step marked the real founding of San Antonio. Within the next
thirteen years the building of four more missions got under way. King
Philip of Spain began colonization of the province, when in 1731 sixteen
Canary Island families arrived and settled in San Antonio. This
settlement was known as the “_Villa de San Fernando_”, and it is on the
site of this original settlement that the Old San Fernando Cathedral
stands today. This little villa in the wilderness formed the nucleus
about which San Antonio gradually developed. Many prominent citizens
today are descendants of these early settlers.

Progress for the community during the next half century was slow, for
San Antonio was on trails seldom traveled and was brought into little
contact with the outside world. The missions established earlier in the
century prospered, expanded and then declined. In 1793-94 they were
secularized and ceased to function as church settlements. Then followed
a period of waning Spanish religious and political influence. In 1811
Mexico revolted against Spain and San Antonio was occupied several
times, alternately by Mexican Revolutionists and Spanish Royalists.

In 1820 Moses Austin, a Connecticut Yankee living in Missouri, left his
home and traveled to San Antonio, seeking permission of the Spanish
authorities, still in power, to establish a colony of Americans in
Texas. After Austin’s death from hardships encountered during his trip,
approval was granted his plan and it was carried out by his son, Stephen
F. Austin. The years 1821 to 1836 saw a flood of Anglo-American
immigration pouring in.

Mexico achieved her independence from Spain in 1821 and San Antonio and
Texas came under the domination of the newly formed Mexican government
which put forth inconsistent confused policies. The earlier liberal
grants to the Anglo-Americans were questioned. Following a series of
revolutions begun in 1829, unscrupulous rulers successfully seized power
in Mexico. Their unjust acts and despotic decrees led to revolution in
Texas. The Texans formed an army, and in November 1835 established a
provisional government.

In 1836, at the former mission San Antonio de Valero, the famous battle
of the Alamo was fought. W. B. Travis, James Bonham, James Bowie, David
Crockett and some 180 Texans held off, from February 23 to March 6, the
Mexican army of more than 5000 troops under General Lopez de Santa Anna.
The Mexicans finally broke over the mission walls on the morning of
March 6 and bayoneted or knifed the entire garrison. Santa Anna was
decisively beaten by Texans under General Sam Houston at the battle of
San Jacinto forty-six days later. Following this San Antonio came under
the rule of the newly formed Republic of Texas.

The year 1845 saw the annexation of Texas to the United States. In 1861,
during the war between the States, Texas seceded from the Union. New
times began in 1865 at the close of the Civil War. San Antonio became
the center of a cattle empire. Longhorns were driven northward up the
trails to market; mile-long wagon trains from Mexico began to come
through the city. The Southern Pacific Railroad was constructed through
this section in 1877. In 1898 the Spanish-American War again stimulated
military activity in San Antonio and Colonel Theodore Roosevelt trained
his Rough Riders at the site now marked by Roosevelt Park.

And so until 1900 San Antonio had a colorful life. Then it settled down
to consistent growth and progress. Oil was discovered near the city.
Hundreds of new families came to make this their home because of the
natural beauty, the mild climate, the healthfulness and business
opportunities. But progress proceeds without dimming the past and it is
the past that draws thousands of visitors to this unique city of
picturesque contrasts.

Today, more than 2,000 acres are included in the city’s 60 parks and
plazas. One of the most complete city park systems in the nation,
Brackenridge Park embraces 320 acres. Among its interesting features is
a Zoo which ranks among the nation’s largest and best.

The San Antonio River which finds its source in numerous flowing springs
just north of Brackenridge Park and winds its way through the business
section of the city, has been transformed into a beautiful Venetian
canal with walkways below the street level along banks lined with
semi-tropical flowers and shrubs.

An important military center since its beginning, San Antonio now
possesses the largest permanent army post of the nation in Fort Sam
Houston, headquarters for the Eighth Corps Area. An arsenal is located
here, Normoyle Quartermaster Depot and Camps Stanley and Bullis. San
Antonio saw the birth of the air corps in 1910 and today are located
here the military flying fields of Randolph, the “West Point of the
Air”; Kelly, Duncan and Brooks.

Thus the past two hundred years have seen much colorful drama enacted
under the flags of France, Spain, Mexico, the Republic of Texas, the
Confederacy, and the United States. Each flag has left mirrored a part
of its own significance. The curious mixture of old and new which is San
Antonio has been recorded in the pages of this book.

                                                         Claude B. Aniol

  [Illustration: One of the most famed historic shrines in the United
  States is the Alamo, the old chapel of _Mission San Antonio de
  Valero_, founded in 1718. Here on March 6, 1836, a band of less than
  200 Texas patriots valiantly defending the Alamo against more than
  5,000 troops of Santa Anna, the Mexican general, were massacred.
  “Remember the Alamo!” became the battle-cry of other Texans. Santa
  Anna was later defeated by General Sam Houston’s forces at the battle
  of San Jacinto.

  Most of the earlier history of the Alamo, is shrouded in obscurity. It
  was named in honor of St. Anthony of Padua and the Duke of Valero, a
  Spanish viceroy. Although the mission was founded in 1718, the
  cornerstone of the chapel was not laid until 1744. Founded for the
  purpose of Christianizing and educating the Indians, it later became a
  fortress and was the scene of many conflicts prior to the immortal
  siege of 1836. The ravages of time, of faulty construction, of war and
  fire have destroyed all the buildings except the chapel, and even this
  has been partially restored. According to some historians, the name
  “Alamo” came from a company of soldiers bearing the name who were once
  quartered there, and another claims it was derived from a grove of
  cottonwood trees nearby, “Alamo” being the Spanish word for
  cottonwood.]

  [Illustration: Mission Conception, _Nuestra Señora de la Purisima
  Conception de Acuna_, was established in 1731. It is probably the best
  preserved of the Texas missions, despite the fact that when it was
  secularized in 1794 its lands were distributed among the Indians,
  settlers and soldiers and it ceased to function as a church
  settlement.

  Conception and the other missions of the San Antonio area are built of
  adobe and porous gray rock called tufa. The walls of this mission are
  45 inches thick. The topmost roofs of the twin towers are pyramidical
  and of stone, with smaller corner and center cap stones.]

  [Illustration: The interior plan of Conception is the cruciform.
  Original frescoes of vegetable and mineral dyes are still visible.]

  [Illustration: The niche within the triangle above the ornamental
  entrance of Conception once held a statue. The coat of arms and
  symbols of the Order of St. Francis are carved in the center of the
  arch. Here and there can still be seen spots of what were once vivid
  frescoes adorning the mission front.]

  [Illustration: Conception from the south side presents the Moorish
  dome with its wide stone serrations. The walls at the right are all
  that remain of the mission kitchen, destroyed during the battle of
  Conception in 1835.]

  [Illustration: A simple arcade runs south from the entrance of
  Conception, connecting at the right and far end with the former living
  quarters of the monks.]

  [Illustration: Mission San Jose (_San Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo_),
  acclaimed “Queen of the Missions”, was established in 1720 by Father
  Margil, one of the pioneer missionaries of New Spain. The first chapel
  was completed in 1731, and the entire mission plan, in all of its
  glory, by 1779. Time and neglect had caused many of the original
  mission buildings to crumble away.

  As it stands today, with restoration completed, San Jose presents an
  interesting picture of the extensiveness of the original mission plan.
  It was the most beautiful, the most prosperous and the best fortified
  of the missions in New Spain. The mission building itself faces west,
  with a frontage of 62 feet, and including the monastery wing, is 241
  feet long. The front walls are almost 5 feet thick and the others but
  slightly less. The Mission is enclosed in a quadrangle embracing more
  than six acres, protected by ramparts forming the outer walls of the
  Indian quarters which were a part of the establishment.

  Construction of the chapel took ten years, following a slow and
  tedious process. As the main walls were built, earth was constantly
  hauled in, the level being raised as the stones were piled higher.
  When the roof line was reached, dirt for the dome was piled higher and
  moulded so that each stone could be locked in place. With the roof
  completed, the dirt was dug out from beneath and the balance of the
  building finished. The single tower of San Jose rises to the height of
  the average seven and one-half story building, and the hemispheric
  dome of the church is almost as high.]

  [Illustration: The richly ornamented facade of San Jose is considered
  one of this Mission’s most notable features. Those parts not
  originally covered with carving were decorated with frescoes. The
  facade is rich with beautiful stone carving and ornamentation that is
  still in an excellent state of preservation despite the vandalism of
  relic hunters during the many years the mission was deserted following
  secularization.]

  [Illustration: The roof, dome and front of the walls of the original
  main chapel of San Jose crashed during a storm in 1868. They remained
  in a state of disrepair until 1937.]

  [Illustration: The lower portion of the facade of San Jose presents
  the work of the original sculptors. Above the doors is carved our Lady
  of Guadalupe. Figures in niches on each side of the doors, Saint
  Joachim and Saint Anne, are no longer intact. The hearts above these
  two statues represent the hearts of Mary and Joseph.]

  [Illustration: The window is framed in a wreath, above which is a
  partially mutilated statue of St. Joseph. Saints Dominic and Francis
  of Assisi are represented by statues on the right and left of the
  window.]

  [Illustration: Two-story cloisters connect with the main building.]

  [Illustration: Adjoining the main church at San Jose is a smaller
  chapel, which can be entered through this sculptured door. The
  original red cedar doors still swing on the old wrought iron hinges.]

  [Illustration: Padres of bygone days peacefully fingered their
  rosaries in this picturesque cloister.]

  [Illustration: The “Rose Window” of the San Jose Sacristy is said to
  be the work of one Pedro Huizar who toiled on it for five years.
  Legend has it that an unhappy romance caused the artist to pour his
  heart and soul into the design.]

  [Illustration: This cloister garden at San Jose no doubt abounded in
  native trees, flowers and shrubs just as it does today.]

  [Illustration: The old Mission Mill (below) has been reconstructed on
  its original foundations.]

  [Illustration: Lookouts were provided above each of the four gates
  entering the plaza at San Jose. Unfriendly Indians, however, seem to
  have seldom bothered the mission.]

  [Illustration: Around three sides of the plaza are reproduced the
  living quarters of the mission Indians.]

  [Illustration: MISSION SAN FRANCISCO de la ESPADA

  The wrought iron cross atop this mission is said to have been made on
  the premises by the founders.]

  [Illustration: _Mission San Francisco de la Espada_ was established in
  1731, the main church building in a plan including many other
  structures, a few of which still remain. But most have long since been
  destroyed. One wonders why the Mission, dedicated to St. Francis,
  founder of the order of Franciscans, should be referred to as St.
  Francis of the Sword. Tradition has it that the tower was built in the
  form of the hilt of a sword. One’s imagination is to project the
  length of the blade to complete the similarity to the whole weapon.]

  [Illustration: A number of the original statues of the Franciscans can
  still be seen in the chapel of Mission Espada. These are hand carved
  of native wood, with movable limbs. The heads have glass eyes and
  separately cut teeth.]

  [Illustration: A fortified tower has thirty-six-inch walls. Holes for
  cannon muzzles were created near the base. Musket loopholes can be
  seen higher.]

  [Illustration: The Moorish entrance of Mission Espada. A wooden cross
  beside the door is a reminder of the efficacy of prayer.]

  [Illustration: Nestled in a thick grove of tall hackberry and pecan
  trees, stands Mission San Juan Capistrano. Founded in 1731, this
  Mission is less imposing than the others in the area. San Juan
  Capistrano followed the plan typical of the other missions, with an
  enclosed area containing all the buildings. Although in ruins, the
  original boundaries and foundations can still be seen. Unlike other
  missions the main buildings formed part of the rampart walls.]

  [Illustration: Of the chapel interior of San Juan Capistrano, the
  outer walls, the three wooden statues and a few odd items represent
  the original mission.]

  [Illustration: Looking through the entrance gate into “La Villita”, a
  restored settlement of the oldest remaining residential section of the
  city. It was started about 1722 shortly after the establishment of the
  presidio San Antonio de Bejar.]

  [Illustration: The houses in La Villita are built of rock and adobe.
  The residents were mostly soldiers, many of whom had intermarried with
  the Indians, and their families. A feeling of class distinction was
  created in 1731 with the coming of the Canary Islanders, who
  considered themselves of noble lineage. The Islanders established
  their own settlement and refused to have any relations with those
  living in La Villita.]

  [Illustration: The Cos House in the Villita settlement is an
  outstanding example of an early dwelling in San Antonio. Here General
  Perfecto de Cos signed articles of capitulation on December 9, 1835,
  after the Texans had captured San Antonio from the Mexican force.]

  [Illustration: High walls to give protection as well as privacy,
  enclose a patio of the Cos House. The house itself is of adobe with
  very thick walls.]

  [Illustration: This picturesque old adobe house on Dawson Street is
  but a few hundred yards from the Alamo and is typical of hundreds of
  similar early homes still to be seen. At the door of this home is a
  _metate_ stone, still used by many Mexicans to grind their corn for a
  _masa_ mixture used in making tortillas.]

  [Illustration: Located in Military Plaza is the Spanish Governors’
  Palace, a restoration of the historic building used by the Spanish
  governors and vice-governors of the province.]

  [Illustration: In the keystone over the entrance is the Hapsburg coat
  of arms bearing the date 1749. Philip V of Spain, founder of the
  Canary Island settlement in San Antonio was a descendant and heir of
  the Spanish Hapsburgs.]

  [Illustration: The arrangement and furnishing of the ten rooms in the
  Spanish Governors’ Palace give a picture of home life in the better
  class Spanish homes of the day. In such homes there was a private
  chapel such as this room of the Blessed Virgin.

  There are four fireplaces in the Palace, each different. According to
  tradition, sticks of wood were placed on end in one corner of the
  fireplace and the fair señoritas named each stick for a young señor.
  He was worthy of her consideration if the stick burned evenly, but if
  it burned in the middle and fell apart, he was not to be trusted.]

  [Illustration: This is the living room in the palace.]

  [Illustration: This interesting stairway led up to the _despensa_, or
  storage pantry, where food was stored.]

  [Illustration: In the _cocina_ or kitchen of the Spanish Governors’
  Palace the stove is typical of the Spanish kitchen in which charcoal
  fanned to flame by bellows, is used.]

  [Illustration: This _comedor_ (dining room) in the Governors’ Palace
  was the scene of many gay and festive affairs.]

  [Illustration: The garden of the Spanish Governors’ Palace, filled
  with subtropical shrubbery and flowers, could have been no more
  beautiful in the days when Spanish viceroys ruled within its walls.
  The pebble mosaic walks form interesting patterns in the patio.]

  [Illustration: Moses Austin, born in Connecticut, lost in 1819 the
  fortunes he had made in the South and West and two days before
  Christmas of the following year arrived in San Antonio seeking
  permission from the Spanish authorities to bring 300 families from the
  states to found a colony. This bronze statue of Moses Austin, modeled
  by Waldine Tauch, stands on the City Hall grounds facing the restored
  Spanish Governors’ Palace, from whence came permission to establish
  his colony.]

  [Illustration: Looking across Main Plaza to the San Fernando
  Cathedral. It is here that the original Canary Islanders settled in
  1731, naming the spot “Plaza de las Islas”. San Fernando Cathedral was
  completed in 1873 after a fire destroyed most of the original 1749
  building. Santa Anna used the church as an observation point during
  the siege of the Alamo in 1836.]

  [Illustration: This Georgia Marble Cenotaph in memory of the heroes of
  the Alamo stands opposite the Alamo fortress area. Its sides are
  inscribed with the names of all who fell at the Alamo. Pompeo Coppini
  was the sculptor. At the left is the Spanish Colonial Post Office, at
  the right, the Medical Arts Building.]

  [Illustration: This sixteen room mansion built in 1859 for James Vance
  of Stebaune, Ireland, stands as a splendid example of the Greek
  Revival influence in architecture felt all through the South before
  the Civil War. Robert E. Lee was often a guest here. The lumber and
  iron railings were brought in from New Orleans and much of the
  materials used in its construction were imported. It is said that the
  water hydrants were of solid silver.]

  [Illustration: The San Antonio River is but a narrow meandering
  stream, with headwaters just outside the northern city limits. In the
  twists and turns it makes, crossing six miles of street, it passes
  beneath 42 bridges. The Indians of the locality used a word that
  characteristically describes it as a
  “drunken-old-man-going-home-at-night”.

  The beautiful San Antonio River is about twenty feet below street
  level and the part that winds along twenty-one blocks of the downtown
  business section has been beautified and transformed into a
  Venetian-like canal. Stairways, each of a different design, lead down
  from the bridges to the river walkways lined with trees and shrubs,
  many of them semi-tropical. Here one can stop and relax away from the
  noise of traffic on the upper street level.]

  [Illustration: In the early days, Old St. Mary’s College, established
  in 1852, maintained a boat landing here and many of the boys who lived
  along the river came to school in their boats.]

  [Illustration: On St. Mary’s Street, at a picturesque bend in the
  river, has been preserved the home of John Twohig, erected in the
  early 1840’s. Because he gave barrels of bread to the poor on each
  Saturday, Twohig was given the name of “the breadline banker”.]

  [Illustration: One of the several boat landings along the San Antonio
  River. Many of the buildings bordering the river have overhanging
  balconies and a few street level business houses can be reached from
  river bank entrances.]

  [Illustration: The Arneson River Theatre, a unique outdoor playhouse,
  can be reached through this Villita Street entrance which adjoins the
  Cos House, as well as from the river walks. Seen through the arch is a
  portion of the stage.]

  [Illustration: From the Villita Art Gallery grounds a portion of the
  Arneson River Theatre stage with the permanent back drop of a mission
  type building and bell arches, can be seen at the right.]

  [Illustration: Tiers of grass-covered seats accommodating nearly a
  thousand people form the seating arrangement of the Arneson River
  Theatre.]

  [Illustration: The Municipal Auditorium, built as a memorial to the
  World War dead, has a seating capacity of over 6,000.]

  [Illustration: The little Block House pictured here was built in 1862
  as a defense against the Indians. It is located in San Pedro Park, an
  old council ground of the Indians.]

  [Illustration: The Pioneers’-Trail Drivers’ Memorial in Brackenridge
  Park has many interesting exhibits. The Texas Trail Drivers, an
  association of men who made drives up the early cattle trails, have
  official headquarters here.]

  [Illustration: Thomas Jefferson Senior High School, a modern
  adaptation of Spanish Colonial architecture, is the largest of the
  city’s several senior schools.]

  [Illustration: The longhorn, once a familiar sight on the ranges of
  Texas, have probably made more history than any other breed of cattle.
  Of Spanish origin, their first appearance in the southwest was
  probably with Coronado’s expedition in 1541. These big lanky,
  raw-boned animals, with a horn spread sometimes reaching nine feet,
  have long since been supplanted by improved beef types. In the
  Brackenridge Park Zoo can be seen a number of these picturesque
  animals which have now become somewhat of a curiosity.]

  [Illustration: In Brackenridge Park Zoo, one of the leading zoological
  gardens of the nation, an African panorama with natural pits for the
  animals displays the most important specimens in barless areas.]

  [Illustration: The Sunken Garden Theatre in Brackenridge Park. Here
  during the summer in a magnificent setting are presented light operas
  and concerts.]

  [Illustration: An abandoned rock quarry was converted into this
  Japanese Garden.]

  [Illustration: Within the Quadrangle at Fort Sam Houston is the
  88-foot clock tower which, when it was constructed in the late
  seventies, also served as a watch-tower for the fort.]

  [Illustration: Kelly Field, established during World War I, is the
  oldest advanced flying training school in the nation. The dull gray
  frame hangars and buildings erected at that time still constitute most
  of the field’s structures, although in recent years many fine
  permanent type buildings like the Cadet Barracks pictured here, have
  been erected.]

  [Illustration: Most of America’s great aviators of the past quarter
  century received their “wings” at Kelly Field. Ground school study at
  the field is now carried on in this new Academic Building.]

  [Illustration: Randolph Field, “The West Point of the Air”, is one of
  the largest military airdromes in the world, embracing a total area of
  approximately two miles square with the building area occupying 475
  acres of this.

  Here are located the primary and basic flying schools of the Air
  Corps, U. S. Army. The key structure of the field is the
  Administration Building pictured here, which has a tower 175 feet
  high, topped by a powerful beacon to help orientate night fliers.]

  [Illustration: A portion of Randolph Field looking south from the top
  of the Administration Building. The home in the foreground is that of
  the commanding officer of the field.]

  [Illustration: Randolph Field from the air.]

  [Illustration: Two of the Cadet barracks at Randolph Field. The
  Spanish type of architecture has been followed consistently in all the
  construction at the field, with the exception of the hangars.]

  [Illustration: Another Cadet barracks.]

  [Illustration: The Randolph Field Post Chapel.]

  [Illustration: Sailboats.]


                                                                   $1.25




                             _San Antonio_
                           _City of Missions_


                                   By
                            CLAUDE B. ANIOL

Travelers who have visited San Antonio remember it as a city with a warm
and personal charm. It is one of the rare places which embody and
symbolize all that is America. Founded by the Spanish in the late
seventeenth century, San Antonio has flown the flags of France, Spain,
Mexico, the Republic of Texas, the Confederacy, and the United States.

In the midst of an important city which is a center of industry and
commerce stand the lovely 200-year-old missions, and the Alamo, whose
defense by Bowie, Crockett and their fellow heroes gave birth to a great
rallying cry of our nation. Nearby are the aviation stations of
Randolph, Kelly, Brooks and Duncan Fields, “the cradle of America’s air
might.”

_Claude B. Aniol, one of America’s foremost photographers, is eminently
qualified by his intimate knowledge of San Antonio, his home, to portray
in superb photographs this dynamic and busy, yet always picturesque
city._




                        _American Guide Series_


America is being rediscovered today. In every state of the Union, in
large cities, tiny villages, on the open highway, members of Federal
Writers’ Projects are revealing the riches of the land. The American
Guide Series is a heartlifting experiment in co-operative literature.
Field investigators, cartographers, writers, editors, photographers,
business supervisors have contributed to the task of producing guide
books which shall be accurate, timely, convenient, and entertaining.

The primary emphasis in the books is upon the tours. Travelers in cars,
on trains, in busses—campers, hikers, fishermen, hunters—will find here
the information they need. How far to the next town; what kind of road;
are there hotels, campsites; what should we see; are there side trips;
what are the traffic and game laws? These are the first considerations
of travel.

But the book contains more than that. The authors are not Baedekers
descending for a moment on some foreign spot. They are writing also for
the historian today and tomorrow who would know how the states appear to
the people who inhabit them. Sections devoted to the history of the
particular state, the temper of its people, the nature of its resources
and industries, the problems it faces and the way it meets them, endow
the reader—be he tourist, student, or armchair traveler—with an intimate
knowledge of the region. These volumes are an invitation to visit
America.

The volumes in the American Guide Series contain a wealth of information
on the region they cover. Each gives an account of the history and
folklore of the city or state, information concerning the recreational
facilities available, and many tours. Maps and many beautiful
illustrations supplement the text.

  Alabama                                        $4.00
  Arizona State Guide                            $4.00
  Arkansas State Guide                           $4.00
  California State Guide                         $4.00
  Colorado State Guide                           $4.00
  Delaware State Guide                           $4.00
  Iowa State Guide                               $4.00
  Kansas State Guide                             $4.00
  Kentucky State Guide                           $4.00
  Key West City Guide                            $2.00
  Los Angeles City Guide                         $4.00
  Louisiana State Guide                          $4.00
  Minnesota State Guide                          $4.00
  Mission San Xavier del Bac, Arizona            $1.00
  Mississippi State Guide                        $4.00
  Montana State Guide                            $4.00
  Mount Hood Guide                               $2.00
  Nebraska State Guide                           $4.00
  New Jersey State Guide                         $4.00
  New Mexico State Guide                         $4.00
  The Oregon Trail                               $2.00
  San Francisco City Guide                       $4.00
  Santa Barbara City Guide                       $2.00
  Tennessee State Guide                          $4.00
  Texas State Guide                              $4.00
  Utah State Guide                               $4.00
  Washington, D. C. Guide                        $4.00


                             HASTINGS HOUSE
                       Publishers    New York, 18




                          Transcriber’s Notes


--Copyright notice provided as in the original—this e-text is public
  domain in the country of publication.

--Silently corrected palpable typos; left non-standard spellings and
  dialect unchanged.

--Moved some captions closer to the corresponding pictures; exchanged
  the captions on pages 32 and 33.

--In the text versions, delimited italicized text by _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of San Antonio, by Claude B. Aniol

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAN ANTONIO ***

***** This file should be named 52516-0.txt or 52516-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/5/1/52516/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson, Dave Morgan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

