The Project Gutenberg EBook of Voyager 1 Encounters Saturn, by 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Voyager 1 Encounters Saturn

Author: National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Release Date: December 18, 2017 [EBook #56205]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGER 1 ENCOUNTERS SATURN ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                      Voyager 1 Encounters Saturn




                                Contents


  Foreword                                                              1
  Introduction                                                          3
  The Planet                                                            4
  The Rings                                                            12
  The Satellites                                                       20
  A Glimpse Back                                                       32
  The Voyager Mission                                                  36
      MISSION OBJECTIVES                                               36
      SPACECRAFT CHARACTERISTICS                                       36
      SATURN ENCOUNTER                                                 36
  Scientific Highlights                                                38
      SATURN                                                           38
      RINGS                                                            38
      NEW SATELLITES                                                   38
      INNER SATELLITES                                                 38
      TITAN                                                            39
      OUTER SATELLITES                                                 39
      MAGNETOSPHERE                                                    39
  Scientific Investigations                                            40

    [Illustration: COVER: Saturn and two of its moons, Tethys (above)
    and Dione (below), were photographed by Voyager 1 on November 3,
    1980, from 13 million kilometers (8 million miles). The shadow of
    Tethys is cast onto the cloudtops in the upper right corner of the
    image.]




                                Foreword


The pictures assembled in this publication are a part of the rich and
varied harvest of information returned by Voyager 1 across nearly a
billion miles of interplanetary space. These images are of great beauty
as well as great scientific interest, serving to remind us of the
awesome and breathtaking dimensions of the solar system we inhabit.
Voyager is providing intriguing new information which should help us to
understand how the Earth—and possibly the universe—was formed. Already
there have been surprises and puzzles that paint a completely new
picture of Saturn and its neighborhood, including the discovery of three
new moons, startling information about Saturn’s rings, and observation
of the unexpectedly complex structure of Saturn’s atmosphere and that of
its largest moon, Titan. It will take years for scientists to assimilate
completely the information which is cascading down from Voyager. What
more will this marvel of technology have to tell us before it departs
the solar system to travel endlessly among the stars?

                                       Robert A. Frosch, _Administrator_
                         _National Aeronautics and Space Administration_
                                                           December 1980


The date of each photograph and the distance of the spacecraft from the
planet or satellite are included with each picture.

  For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government
  Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402
  Stock No. 033-000-00817-1

    [Illustration: _Voyager 1 was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida,
    on September 5, 1977, beginning its journey to Jupiter, Saturn, and
    beyond._]




                              Introduction


No other generation has had the opportunity or the technology to reach
beyond our world—to see, to touch, to hear the forces that shape our
universe. In slightly over two decades, man has ingeniously explored
five distant planets—and two dozen moons. We have seen their weather and
surfaces, landed on some, probed the atmospheres of others, and listened
to their radio noises.

Under the planetary exploration program of the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, the Voyager Mission, begun in 1972, was designed
to explore Jupiter, Saturn, their satellites, rings, magnetic fields,
and interplanetary space. Two automated, reprogrammable spacecraft,
Voyagers 1 and 2, were launched in late summer of 1977. Their goals: the
outer planets.

Both spacecraft made astounding discoveries in the Jupiter system in
1979—a thin ring, a thick ionized sulfur and oxygen torus, an actively
volcanic satellite—these were but a few of the treasures yielded by the
two Jupiter flybys.

Now, Voyager 1 has completed exploration of its final target: the ringed
planet Saturn and its enigmatic giant satellite, Titan. True to the
generally unpredictable nature of planetary exploration, the treasures
of the Saturn system far exceeded all expectations. We learned more
about Saturn in one week than in all of recorded history, thanks to one
trusty robot no larger than a compact car and to thousands of diligent
and imaginative people.

Both spacecraft carry an assortment of optical, radiometric, and fields
and particles sensing instruments. Taken together, their data present a
comprehensive picture of a planetary system—and clues to what is
happening, what has happened, and what may happen in our universe.

This publication presents the preliminary photographic results of
Voyager 1’s encounter with Saturn and its major satellites. Voyager 1
transmitted over 17,500 images in its four months of close observations
of the system. Many of these images have been combined to produce
mosaics and color pictures. Hundreds have yet to be closely examined.

The second Voyager spacecraft will begin its close Saturn observations
in early June 1981 and make its closest approach to the planet’s
northern hemisphere on August 25. Then, due to its launch during a
period of rare planetary alignment occurring only once every 175 years,
Voyager 2 will be able to continue on to a rendezvous with the seventh
planet, Uranus, in January 1986, and perhaps even the eighth planet,
Neptune, in August 1989.

Voyager 1’s primary mission is complete. But its usefulness is far from
over. As we go about our daily business, Voyager 1 is searching for
another frontier—the edge of our solar system. In 7 to 15 years, the
spacecraft will cross the heliopause—the farthest reaches of our Sun’s
magnetic field influence. Then, high above our ecliptic plane, Voyager 1
will continue its flight toward the star Alpha Ophiuchus. Eventually,
Voyager 1 will be too distant to communicate with Earth and will
silently drift in space forever.

    Andrew J. Stofan, _Acting Associate Administrator for Space Science_
                         _National Aeronautics and Space Administration_




                               The Planet


    [Illustration: 11/5/80    9 million km (5.5 million mi)

    Saturn is the sixth planet from the Sun and second largest in our
    solar system. Like Jupiter, it is a giant sphere of gas—mostly
    hydrogen and helium—with a possible core of rocky material. Various
    features in Saturn’s cloudtops are visible in the accompanying
    color-enhanced image of the planet’s northern hemisphere:
    small-scale convective cloud features (similar to, but much larger
    than, thunderstorms in Earth’s atmosphere) are visible in the brown
    belt; an isolated convective cloud with a dark ring is visible in
    the light brown zone; and a longitudinal wave is visible in the
    light blue region.]

    [Illustration: 9/17/80    76 million km (47 million mi)

    As Voyager 1 approached Saturn, a series of dark and light cloud
    bands (belts and zones) became apparent in the planet’s northern
    hemisphere through a high altitude atmospheric haze. The planet’s
    shadow obscures the rings behind and immediately to the east of the
    disk. In addition, the shadow of the rings on the planet’s disk can
    be seen just north of the rings themselves as they cross in front of
    the planet. Six of Saturn’s 15 known satellites are visible.
    Saturn’s largest moon, Titan (considerably larger than Earth’s
    moon), is clearly visible in the upper left corner. The smaller
    satellites Dione, Tethys, and Rhea are shown in the lower left
    corner (upper, middle, and lower, respectively). Two of the
    innermost moons, Mimas and Enceladus, appear to the right of the
    planet (Mimas is the one closer to the planet). These six moons
    orbit Saturn in the equatorial plane and appear in their present
    positions because Voyager is above that plane.]

    [Illustration: 10/18/80    34 million km (21 million mi)

    The North Temperate Belt is visible as the violet-colored belt in
    this false-color photograph. In this image, features which are
    especially bright in ultraviolet light appear as turquoise and
    violet, while ultraviolet-dark areas appear orange. Notice in
    particular the three spots (two bright orange and one pale violet)
    at mid-northern latitudes. The bright spots are similar to those
    shown at much higher resolution in later images. The distinct color
    difference between the North Equatorial Belt and Saturn’s other
    belts and zones may be due to a thick haze layer covering the
    northern portion of the belt. It is not yet understood why the
    southern hemisphere of the planet (below the rings) appears bluer
    than the northern hemisphere. Color spots in the rings are artifacts
    of image processing.]

    [Illustration: 10/30/80    18 million km (11 million mi)

    Saturn’s soft, velvety appearance and previously unseen detail in
    its mysterious rings became visible as Voyager 1 approached the
    planet. For example, a gap in the dark C-Ring is now visible, and
    material can be seen within the relatively wide Cassini Division
    (long believed to be empty), which separates the B-Ring (middle)
    from the A-Ring (outer). The Encke Division appears near the outer
    edge of the A-Ring. Detail can be seen within the shadow cast by the
    rings upon the planet: the broad, dark band near the equator is the
    shadow of the B-Ring; the thinner, brighter line just to the south
    is the shadow of the less dense A-Ring. Three of Saturn’s moons,
    Tethys (outer left), Enceladus (inner left), and Mimas (right) are
    also visible in this computer mosaic of Voyager 1 images.]

    [Illustration: 11/6/80    8.5 million km (5.3 million mi)

    An unusual red oval cloud feature, similar to (but smaller than)
    Jupiter’s Great Red Spot, was discovered in the southern hemisphere
    of Saturn. The oval, 6000 kilometers (4000 miles) in length, is
    located at 55 degrees south latitude. The difference in color
    between the red oval and the surrounding bluish clouds in these two
    false-color images indicates that material within the oval contains
    a substance that absorbs more blue and violet light than the bluish
    clouds. Voyager scientists first observed the oval in August 1980,
    and the feature has retained its appearance since its discovery.]

    [Illustration: 11/6/80    8 million km (5 million mi)

    In this photograph, the shadow of the satellite Dione is seen as a
    dark circle on the face of the planet.]

    [Illustration: 11/10/80    3.5 million km (2.2 million mi)

    A ribbon-like wave structure and small convective features marking a
    westward jet stream above the wave are visible in this photograph of
    Saturn’s cloudtops. The view, extending from 40 degrees to 60
    degrees north latitude, shows features 65 kilometers (40 miles) in
    diameter. Measurements in images such as this one indicate that
    Saturn has fewer east-to-west wind currents than does Jupiter.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    442,000 km (265,000 mi)

    Numerous small cloud features were photographed as Voyager 1 passed
    above Saturn’s southern hemisphere. At these polar latitudes, the
    large-scale light and dark bands break down into small-scale
    features, seen here as waves and eddies.]

    [Illustration: 11/7/80    7.5 million km (4.6 million mi)

    Two brown ovals, approximately 10,000 kilometers (6000 miles)
    across, were discovered in Saturn’s northern hemisphere, at about 40
    degrees and 60 degrees latitude. The polar oval (upper left) has a
    structure similar to Saturn’s red oval located in the southern polar
    latitudes. Detail within the ovals is not visible at this
    resolution, so it is not yet known if they are rotating features
    similar to the many spots in Jupiter’s atmosphere.]




                               The Rings


    [Illustration: 11/12/80    717,000 km (444,000 mi)

    The rings of Saturn have amazed and intrigued astronomers for over
    300 years. Now that we have seen them up close, they are even more
    astonishing. Although they stretch over 65,000 kilometers (40,000
    miles), they may be only a few kilometers thick. The ring
    particles—from a few microns to a meter (three feet) in size—have
    been described as icy snowballs or ice-covered rock. Voyager
    scientists continue to pore over their data, searching for answers
    to the puzzles of the rings. The rings were named in order of their
    discovery, so the labels do not indicate their relative positions.
    From the planet outward, they are known as D, C, B, A, F, and E.]

    [Illustration: 10/25/80    24 million km (15 million mi)

    Extraordinarily complex structure is seen across the entire span of
    Saturn’s ring system. The sequence (taken approximately every 15
    minutes as Voyager 1 approached Saturn) proceeds from top to bottom
    in each column and shows radial “spokes” rotating within the B-Ring.
    The spokes may be caused by a combination of magnetic and
    electrostatic forces.]

    [Illustration: 11/6/80    8 million km (5 million mi)

    Over 95 individual concentric features can he counted; the final
    count in higher resolution images may be anywhere from 500 to 1000
    separate rings. A few of the ringlets shown in this
    computer-assembled mosaic are not concentric circles but are instead
    elliptical. Ring particles are probably ice or ice covered rock.]

    [Illustration: The classic features of the rings are illustrated in
    the diagram.]

  D-RING
  C-RING
  B-RING
  “SPOKE”
  CASSINI DIVISION
  ENCKE DIVISION
  A-RING
  F-RING

    [Illustration: 11/8/80    6 million km (3.7 million mi)

    The Cassini Division is filled with numerous ringlets. Discovered by
    Cassini in 1675, this area between the A- and B-Rings had long been
    thought devoid of material. The Voyager observation of well-defined
    rings within the Cassini Division was an unexpected discovery.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    740,000 km (460,000 mi)

    Saturn’s ring system, viewed from below, appears dramatically
    different from its appearance on the sunlit side. This
    computer-processed image shows the F-Ring circling outside the
    A-Ring, the A-Ring with its Encke Division, the multiple ringlets in
    the Cassini Division, and the optically thick B-Ring, seen here in
    magenta hues (the coloration is an artifact of processing and is not
    real). The B-Ring appears dark from below the ring plane because it
    is dense enough to reflect most of the sunlight, causing it to
    appear very bright when seen from the sunward side. The opaline
    brightness of the Cassini Division here indicates a great deal of
    sunlight being scattered through this region. The Encke Division may
    really be empty, since it appears dark from both above and below.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    720,000 km (450,000 mi)

    Outbound and above the ring plane, Voyager 1 gave us this view of
    Saturn’s rings eight hours after its closest approach to the planet.
    The unique lighting accentuates the many hundreds of bright and dark
    ringlets comprising the ring system. The C-Ring (dark gray area)
    seems to blend into the brighter B-Ring as the concentric features
    radiate out from the planet. The dark spoke-like features seen in
    images taken during the approach to Saturn now appear as bright
    streaks, indicating that they may be composed of small particles.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    750,000 km (470,000 mi)

    Two narrow, braided rings in the F-Ring are evident in this view, as
    well as a broader, very diffuse component about 35 kilometers (20
    miles) across. A totally unexpected discovery, the braided rings
    trace distinctly separate orbits intertwining each other. The
    “knots” may be local clumps of ring material or tiny moons. It is
    difficult to explain this complicated structure using only the
    gravitational forces known to be affecting the particles of this
    ring. It is possible that additional, electrostatic forces may also
    influence these particles.]

    [Illustration: 11/8/80    7 million km (4.3 million mi)

    Brightness variations in the F-Ring may be due to clumping in the
    ring material. The features are seen at the top and again near the
    left edge of the ring in this image. The “gap” in the ring (left
    center) is not real but is the location of a reseau mark on the
    camera’s vidicon tube. These bright features in the F-Ring appear to
    move at the orbital rate of the ring particles and may be larger
    bodies or thicknesses in the rings. Saturn’s thirteenth and
    fourteenth satellites, which orbit on either side of the F-Ring, may
    act like “sheepdogs,” herding the F-Ring particles between them.
    Less than 100 kilometers (60 miles) wide, the F-Ring is located
    outside of the A-Ring. Satellite 14, discovered by Voyager 1, is
    seen just inside the F-Ring.]




                             The Satellites


    [Illustration: In only twelve hours, Saturn’s satellites grew from
    names in ancient mythology into dazzling worlds with personae of
    their own. As Voyager 1 sailed through the Saturn system, it
    returned photographs of Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, Dione, and
    Rhea—all part of a class of intermediate-sized icy bodies heretofore
    unstudied by planetary spacecraft. All but Enceladus show heavily
    cratered surfaces, evidence of aeons of meteorite bombardment.
    Enceladus hints at internal processes, as yet unidentified, which
    may have erased from its surface the evidence of early
    bombardment—but we must await Voyager 2’s arrival next August to
    better understand this body.]

    [Illustration: 11/9/80    4.5 million km (2.8 million mi)

    The surface of giant Titan, now dethroned from its seat as the solar
    system’s largest satellite (Jupiter’s Ganymede is larger), remains
    an enigma, shrouded beneath thick layers of haze.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    22,000 km (14,000 mi)

    Tiny moons—three new ones and three confirmed from previous
    sightings—may tell us much about ring dynamics since gravitational
    forces from satellites probably influence the ring structure. Two of
    these tiny moons are on the verge of collision in the same orbit,
    while several others appear to bound the A- and F-Rings. Iapetus,
    whose two hemispheres differ dramatically in brightness, was
    photographed in its orbit, almost 3.6 million kilometers (2.2
    million miles) from the planet.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    425,000 km (264,000 mi)

    Mimas, Saturn’s innermost large satellite, has an impact crater
    covering more than one quarter the diameter of the entire moon.
    Nowhere else in the solar system has such a disproportionately large
    feature been seen. In fact, it is believed that any impact larger
    than this would probably have shattered Mimas into two or more
    fragments. The crater has a raised rim and central peak, typical of
    large impact structures on terrestrial planets. Additional smaller
    craters, 15 to 45 kilometers (10 to 30 miles) in diameter, can be
    seen scattered across the surface, particularly along the
    terminator. Mimas is one of the small, low density Saturnian
    satellites implying that it is composed primarily of ice.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    130,000 km (80,000 mi)

    Mimas’ other side shows a uniformly and heavily cratered surface—a
    record of the bombardment that occurred throughout the solar system
    in its early history 4.5 billion years ago. A long, narrow trough
    about 5 kilometers (3 miles) wide crosses from northeast to
    southwest. Mimas’ surface is very reflective (about 60 percent),
    indicating that it consists largely of ice, which has been chipped
    and pulverized by aeons of meteoritic bombardment. Such a surface on
    a small, low mass moon would probably resemble light, powdery snow.
    Features as small as 3 kilometers (2 miles) across are visible.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    650,000 km (400,000 mi)

    Enceladus appears to be largely devoid of craters or other major
    surface relief, suggesting that perhaps internal processes may have
    erased such structures. This satellite will be seen better by
    Voyager 2 when it flies past Saturn in August 1981.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    1.2 million km (750,000 mi)

    This heavily cratered surface of Tethys faces toward Saturn and
    includes a large valley about 750 kilometers (500 miles) long and 60
    kilometers (40 miles) wide. The craters are the result of impacts,
    and the valley appears to be a large fracture of unknown origin.
    Tethys has a diameter of 1050 kilometers (650 miles), about
    one-third that of Earth’s Moon. The smallest features visible in
    this picture are about 24 kilometers (15 miles) across.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    700,000 km (435,000 mi)

    Dione reveals two distinctly different hemispheres.  The photograph
    shows Dione’s trailing side. Bright radiating patterns are probably
    rays of debris thrown out of impact craters; other bright areas may
    be topographic ridges and valleys.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    162,000 km (101,000 mi)

    Dione’s other hemisphere (mosaic) also has many impact craters—the
    record of cosmic collisions. The largest crater is less than 100
    kilometers (60 miles) in diameter and includes a well-developed
    central peak. Sinuous valleys (seen near each pole) are probably the
    result of crustal fracturing in the moon’s icy crust. Dione’s
    diameter is only 1100 kilometers (700 miles), much smaller than any
    of Jupiter’s icy moons.]

    [Illustration: 11/13/80    80,000 km (50,000 mi)

    Craters stand shoulder-to-shoulder on the surface of Saturn’s
    satellite Rhea, seen in this mosaic of the highest-resolution
    pictures of the north polar region. Rhea is 1500 kilometers (950
    miles) in diameter and is the most heavily cratered Saturn moon. The
    largest crater, made by the impact of cosmic debris, is about 300
    kilometers (190 miles) in diameter.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    128,000 km (79,500 mi)

    Impact craters on the ancient surface of Rhea closely resemble those
    on Mercury and Earth’s Moon. Many of the craters have central peaks
    formed by rebound of the floor during the explosive formation of the
    crater. Some craters are old and degraded by later impacts. Many
    have sharp rims and appear relatively fresh, while others are very
    shallow and have subdued rims, indicative of their antiquity. White
    areas on the edges of several of the craters are probably fresh ice
    exposed on steep slopes or possibly deposited by volatiles leaking
    from fractured regions. Surface features as small as 2.5 kilometers
    (1.5 miles) in diameter are visible.]

    [Illustration: 11/9/80    4.5 million km (2.8 million mi)

    Titan is a large, bizarre satellite. It is larger (almost 5120
    kilometers or 3180 miles in diameter) than the planet Mercury and
    possesses a dense atmosphere of unique composition. Voyager 1’s
    cameras show Titan’s surface to be totally obscured by a thick layer
    of atmospheric haze. In the full-disk photograph, only two features
    are visible: a faint boundary between the southern and darker
    northern hemispheres and a dark “hood” overlying Titan’s north polar
    region.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    435,000 km (270,000 mi)

    This hood and greater detail in the haze layers are shown in the
    higher resolution photograph.]

    [Illustration: 11/10/80    4.6 million km (2.8 million mi)

    Little detail can be seen in this distant view of Hyperion, the
    satellite which orbits just beyond Titan. Voyager 2 will observe
    Hyperion at a closer range.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    3.2 million km (1.9 million mi)

    Saturn’s satellite Iapetus displays a large, circular feature about
    200 kilometers (120 miles) across with a dark spot in its center.
    The circular feature is probably a large impact structure outlined
    by dark material, possibly thrown out by the impact. The satellite’s
    leading hemisphere is to the left, and the trailing hemisphere,
    which is four to five times brighter, is to the right. Iapetus’
    diameter is 1450 kilometers (900 miles).]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    177,000 km (110,000 mi)

    Two satellites (Saturn’s tenth and eleventh) revolve in nearly
    identical orbits 151,000 kilometers (94,000 miles) from Saturn’s
    center. The satellites are each 100 to 200 kilometers in diameter,
    larger than the distance separating their orbits, and they are
    currently approaching one another at a rate which promises collision
    in about two years. Such a collision, however, will probably be
    averted by orbital changes induced by the satellites’ mutual
    gravitational interactions as they near one another. The trailing
    co-orbital satellite, seen in this photograph, has a very irregular
    outline (the Sun is shining from the left). This color composite was
    produced from three exposures taken over a period of more than six
    minutes. During this period, a thin shadow, cast by a previously
    unknown ring, moved across the satellite causing the “rainbow”
    pattern shown here.]

    [Illustration: 10/25/80    25 million km (16 million mi)

    Two smaller satellites—Saturn’s thirteenth and fourteenth moons—were
    discovered on October 25, 1980, in images taken to study the dark
    “spokes” within Saturn’s B-Ring. The smaller, inner satellite has a
    diameter of about 500 kilometers (300 miles) and is visible just
    outside the A-Ring, near the bottom of the picture. It travels in an
    orbit between the A-Ring and the F-Ring (not visible in this
    photograph). The second satellite, seen to the left, travels just
    outside the F-Ring and is about 600 kilometers (400 miles) in
    diameter. Scientists believe the dimensions of the narrow F-Ring may
    be determined by these two satellites, which orbit on either edge of
    the ring.]




                             A Glimpse Back


    [Illustration: 11/13/80    1.5 million km (930,000 mi)

    Looking back at the Saturn system as it soared upward and outward,
    Voyager 1 continued its observations for nearly five weeks after
    closest Saturn approach. The spacecraft photographed the planet’s
    sunlit crescent, the ring shadows falling on the planet, and
    Saturn’s dark hemisphere illuminated by “ringshine.” It searched for
    lightning and auroras on the planet’s dark side and looked for “sun
    dogs” resulting from ammonia crystals in the atmosphere. It
    continued temperature and composition measurements and searched for
    new satellites out to the orbit of Mimas. It measured the flow of
    plasma in Saturn’s magnetosphere and now, its journey far from over,
    Voyager 1 proceeds toward the outer boundary of our solar system, as
    it seeks to probe the space among the stars of our galaxy, the Milky
    Way.]

    [Illustration: 11/16/80    5.3 million km (3.3 million mi)

    Departing Saturn, Voyager 1 photographed the planet from a unique
    perspective, clearly showing Saturn’s shadow on the rings.]

    [Illustration: 11/12/80    250,000 km (150,000 mi)

    During a 40-minute period on the day of encounter, the spacecraft
    was itself in the planet’s shadow. At this time, the wide-angle
    camera acquired a photograph of this shadow line, revealing ring
    material in a region very close to the planet, where no material had
    been previously observed. This inner ring, the D-Ring, is roughly
    6000 kilometers (4000 miles) wide and extends to within about 6000
    kilometers of Saturn’s cloudtops.]




                          The Voyager Mission


Only once every 175 years are the outer planets aligned in their orbits
so that we can take advantage of gravity-assist trajectories to achieve
encounters with Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune on one mission. The
gravity-assist technique uses one planet’s gravity field and motion
through space to alter the spacecraft’s flight path and propel it
outward toward the next planet. Voyager 1’s trajectory, which was
selected to best view Titan, has now propelled the spacecraft out of the
ecliptic plane, while Voyager 2’s path will remain in this plane to
provide future encounters with Uranus and possibly with Neptune.


MISSION OBJECTIVES

The Voyager Project was approved in June 1972 and had as its mission
objectives:

  ★ Exploration of the Jupiter and Saturn planetary systems, including
          their atmospheres, rings, satellites, and magnetospheres
  ★ Comparative analyses of the two systems
  ★ Investigation of the interplanetary medium between Earth and Saturn

A fourth objective, added in 1976, was to preserve the possibility of
extending the mission to include an investigation of the planet Uranus
and the interstellar medium.

With the completion of Voyager 1’s Saturn flyby, it is now clear that
these objectives will be achieved.


SPACECRAFT CHARACTERISTICS

Two identical spacecraft were developed for the 1977 launch opportunity.
These marvelous machines were cleverly designed to survive the rigors of
long voyages in outer space and to deliver high-quality scientific
information required for detailed understanding of planetary systems.
The spacecraft are both complex—automatically responding to their
Earth-bound monitors that remotely control them via radio commands—and
highly autonomous—capable of caring for themselves in many areas through
a system of sensors, computers, and spare equipment. Each spacecraft
functions on about 400 watts of electrical power which is provided by
nuclear generators. Broadcasts of data across a billion miles to Earth
are accomplished with a spacecraft transmitter power of only about 25
watts, the amount of energy required by a small household light bulb.

Voyager’s scientific payload was carefully chosen to observe Saturn over
a wide range of wave-lengths and to measure magnetic fields, charged
particles, and plasma waves.


SATURN ENCOUNTER

    [Illustration: _Voyager 1 approached within 124,000 kilometers
    (77,000 miles) of Saturn’s cloudtops. Six of the satellites that
    were photographed are shown in their approximate positions at
    closest approach by the spacecraft._]

  TITAN
  DIONE
  TETHYS
  MIMAS
  ENCELADUS
  RHEA

Voyager 1’s Saturn encounter period began on August 22, 1980, at a range
of 109 million kilometers (68 million miles) from the planet. Even at
this great distance, Voyager’s images were better than any from
Earth-based telescopes. During the long encounter period, which extended
through December 19, 1980, continuous observations of Saturn’s realm
were carried out by Voyager’s instruments. Voyager 1’s flight path
through the Saturn system demanded navigation of the highest precision
to meet three critical targets: (1) a close 4000-kilometer (2300-mile)
flyby and occultation at Titan, (2) a precise, three-minute time period
when the spacecraft was emerging from occultation at the same time Earth
was in a position to receive the spacecraft signals passing through the
gap between Saturn and its rings, and (3) a flight path through the
E-Ring at Dione’s orbit to assure safe passage through a zone clear of
potentially dangerous material. To assure these targets were achieved,
small trajectory trim maneuvers were executed on October 11, 1980, and
again on November 6, 1980, as Voyager 1 sped toward Saturn.

    [Illustration: _Voyager spacecraft and scientific instruments._]

  HIGH-GAIN ANTENNA (3.7-meter diameter)
  LOW-ENERGY CHARGED PARTICLE
  COSMIC RAY
  PLASMA
  IMAGING
  ULTRAVIOLET SPECTROMETER
  INFRARED INTERFEROMETER SPECTROMETER
  PHOTOPOLARIMETER
  OPTICAL CALIBRATION TARGET
  PLANETARY RADIO ASTRONOMY AND PLASMA WAVE ANTENNA (2)
  RADIOISOTOPE THERMOELECTRIC GENERATOR (3)
  MAGNETOMETER BOOM

By October 24, 1980, when Voyager 1 was about 30 million kilometers (19
million miles) from Saturn, the spacecraft’s narrow-angle camera could
no longer capture the planet in a single picture. Thus, a period of
multiple images or mosaics began. By November 2, 1980, even four-picture
mosaics could no longer cover the rapidly growing scene. Voyager 1’s
pace of operations reached an exciting peak during the near-encounter
phase from November 11 through November 13, 1980. While still about 1.6
million kilometers (1 million miles) from closest approach to Saturn,
Voyager 1 encountered Titan on November 11, 1980, and then dipped below
the ring plane as it accelerated rapidly toward Saturn. On November 12,
1980, Voyager 1 came within 124,000 kilometers (77,000 miles) of the
cloudtops of Saturn’s southern hemisphere, where Saturn’s gravity
altered the spacecraft’s course, hurtling the spacecraft upward past the
ring plane. Close observation of Saturn’s other major satellites and its
rings were made during this passage.

From Earth to Saturn, Voyager 1 has traveled in the ecliptic plane, the
plane in which the major planets orbit. Now, having completed its final
planetary flyby, Voyager 1 is rising above this plane on a trajectory
that will eventually carry it above and out of the solar system,
probably before the end of this century. As it proceeds, the spacecraft
will return information about the solar wind and magnetic fields in the
far, unexplored reaches of our solar system and will observe cosmic rays
emitted from the distant stars among which Voyager will ultimately
cruise.




                         Scientific Highlights


Some of the most important information gathered by Voyager 1 on the
Saturn system is presented pictorially in this publication and is
supplemented here with brief summaries of the major discoveries,
observations, and theories.


SATURN

Saturn’s atmosphere appears similar to Jupiter’s, with alternating dark
belts and bright zones, circulating storm regions, and other dark and
light cloud markings. Saturn’s belt and zone system extends to higher
latitudes than those on Jupiter, and all of the features are muted by a
thick atmospheric haze, perhaps 70 kilometers (40 miles) deep.

Wind speeds up to 1500 kilometers per hour (900 miles per hour) occur at
the equator—four to five times faster than any Jovian winds.
Temperatures near the cloudtops range from 86 to 92 kelvins (-305° to
-294° Fahrenheit)—nearly 60 degrees colder than at Jupiter. Saturn still
radiates about 2.8 times as much heat as it receives from the Sun. The
coolest temperatures are found at the center of the equatorial zone.

Auroral emissions have been seen near Saturn’s poles, and auroral-type
emissions have been seen in ultraviolet light near the illuminated limb
of the planet.

Lightning bolts have not been seen on Saturn, but radio emissions
typical of lightning discharges have been recorded. The source of these
discharges is believed to be the rings rather than Saturn’s atmosphere.


RINGS

Hundreds of tiny ringlets—a few of them elliptical rather than
circular—comprise the classic A-, B-, and C-Rings, once thought to be
uniform disks of material. The F-Ring, which was first sighted by
Pioneer 11 in 1979, was observed to be three separate, intertwined
ringlets.

The existence of a D-Ring between the C-Ring and the planet has been
confirmed by observations during Voyager 1’s passage through Saturn’s
shadow. The tenuous E-Ring, previously observed from Earth only when
Saturn’s rings could be viewed edge-on (every 15 years), has also been
observed during shadow passage. At least one other ring has been found
between the E- and F-Rings in Voyager images.

Long, radial, spoke-like features in the B-Ring were dark when viewed
upon approach and bright when observed after encounter when the
spacecraft looked back toward the planet and the Sun.


NEW SATELLITES

Voyager 1 photographed six tiny moons, some that had never been seen
before. Satellites 10 and 11, dubbed the “co-orbitals,” share an orbit
91,000 kilometers (57,000 miles) above Saturn’s cloudtops. The leading
satellite has a diameter of about 160 kilometers (100 miles), while the
trailing satellite has an irregular shape, approximately 105 by 65
kilometers (65 by 40 miles).

Little is known about satellites 12, 13, 14, and 15 aside from their
orbits and periods. Satellite 12 orbits at the same distance from Saturn
as Dione, at a point about 60 degrees ahead of Dione. Satellites 13 and
14, outside and inside the F-Ring (respectively), appear to “herd” this
thin ring between them. Satellite 15 appears to limit the outer edge of
the A-Ring in a similar manner.


INNER SATELLITES

Mimas, Enceladus, Tethys, Dione, and Rhea represent a body size not
previously explored by spacecraft. They are larger than Jupiter’s
Amalthea and Mars’ Phobos and Deimos, yet smaller than Mercury, our
Moon, or Jupiter’s large satellites. Their diameters range from 390
kilometers (240 miles) for Mimas to 1530 kilometers (950 miles) for
Rhea, and they are probably composed primarily of water ice.

With the exception of Enceladus, all of these moons have heavily
cratered surfaces, looking much like the Moon and Mercury. Mimas
displays an impact crater whose diameter is one-fourth that of the
satellite—such an impact must have nearly shattered the icy satellite.
Tethys has a valley 70 kilometers (40 miles) wide that stretches 800
kilometers (500 miles) across the satellite, an apparent crustal
fracture resulting from seismic activity. Several sinuous valleys, some
of which appear to branch, are visible on Dione’s surface. Both Dione
and Rhea have bright, wispy streaks on their already highly reflective
surfaces, perhaps caused by ice thrown out of craters by meteorite
impacts.

Of the five inner moons, Enceladus appears the smoothest, but we will
have to wait for Voyager 2 to photograph the satellite at greater
resolution in 1981. Since the maximum intensity of the E-Ring occurs
near Enceladus’ orbit, Enceladus may be a source of E-Ring particles.


TITAN

Titan is now known to be smaller than Jupiter’s Ganymede. Its diameter
is less than 5120 kilometers (3180 miles), which implies a density twice
that of water ice. A dense, hazy atmosphere at least 400 kilometers (250
miles) thick obscures the surface. Voyager 1 determined that Titan has a
nitrogen-rich atmosphere (as does Earth), but with concentrations of
hydrocarbons such as methane (natural gas), ethane, acetylene, ethylene,
and deadly hydrogen cyanide. The haze layers merge into a darkened hood
over the north pole. At the poles, liquid nitrogen lakes may form. The
surface temperature is probably near 100 kelvins (-280° Fahrenheit),
only slightly warmer than the boiling point of liquid nitrogen.

Titan has no appreciable magnetic field and therefore possesses no large
liquid conducting core. It does, however, supply a small amount of
charged particles to Saturn’s magnetosphere.

The southern hemisphere is somewhat brighter than the northern, perhaps
as a result of seasonal effects.


OUTER SATELLITES

Of the three known outer satellites, Voyager 1 studied from a distance
only Hyperion and Iapetus. Tiny Phoebe, in its retrograde (clockwise)
orbit, will be studied by Voyager 2 in the summer of 1981. Hyperion and
Iapetus are most likely composed of water ice, although their masses and
densities are uncertain. Iapetus has one bright and one dark hemisphere.
The dark side, which faces forward as Iapetus circles Saturn, reflects
about one-fifth as much light as the trailing, bright side.


MAGNETOSPHERE

Although it is only about one-third the size of Jupiter’s magnetosphere,
Saturn’s magnetosphere is still an enormous structure, extending nearly
two million kilometers from the planet toward the Sun. The size of the
magnetosphere fluctuates rhythmically as the flow of charged particles
in the solar wind increases or decreases in intensity. The magnetosphere
can be pushed inside Titan’s orbit, so that at times the satellite finds
itself outside of the magnetosphere altogether.

Charged particles in the planet’s magnetosphere are dragged along by the
magnetic field, circling the planet at Saturn’s rotation rate of 10
hours, 39 minutes. These charged particles whiz by Titan at a dizzying
rate of more than 200 kilometers (120 miles) per second. Titan leaves a
motorboat-like wake in its orbital path.

Extending from the orbit of Titan inward to the orbit of Rhea, an
enormous cloud of uncharged hydrogen atoms forms a doughnut-shaped torus
of ultraviolet-emitting particles. Because of their neutrality, these
atoms are not towed around by Saturn’s magnetic field.

Close to the planet, Saturn’s rings act as an effective shield or
absorber of charged particles. The rings themselves are apparently
substantially affected in this process, however, as evidenced by their
“spokes” of fine particles and the lightning-like electrical discharges
attributed to the rings.




                       Scientific Investigations


  INVESTIGATION         SATURN ENCOUNTER OBJECTIVES

  Imaging science       Planetary meteorology; satellite geology;
                        ring structure and dynamics
  Infrared              Atmospheric composition, thermal structure
  interferometry        and dynamics; satellite surface composition
                        and thermal properties; ring composition
  Radio science         Atmospheric and ionospheric structure,
                        constituents, and dynamics at Saturn and
                        Titan; ring particle size
  Ultraviolet           Upper atmospheric composition and structure;
  spectroscopy          auroral processes; distribution of ions and
                        neutral atoms in the Saturn system
  Magnetic fields       Planetary magnetic field; magnetospheric
                        structure
  Plasma particles      Magnetospheric ion and electron
                        distribution; solar wind interaction with
                        Saturn; ions from satellites
  Plasma waves          Plasma electron densities; wave-particle
                        interactions; low-frequency wave emissions
  Planetary radio       Polarization and spectra of radio-frequency
  astronomy             emissions; plasma densities
  Low-energy charged    Distribution, composition, and flow of
  particles             energetic ions and electrons;
                        satellite-energetic particle interactions
  Cosmic ray particles  Distribution, composition, and flow of
                        high-energy trapped nuclei; energetic
                        electron spectra


“_Notre voyageur connaissait merveilleusement les lois de la
gravitation, et toutes les forces attractives et répulsives. Il s’en
servait si à propos, que tantôt à l’aide d’un rayon de soleil, tantôt
par la commodité d’une comète, il allait de globe en globe, lui et les
siens, comme un oiseau voltige de branche en branche._”

“_Our voyager knew marvelously the laws of gravitation, and all
attractive and repulsive forces. He used them in such a timely way that,
once with the help of a ray of sunshine, another time thanks to a
cooperative comet, he went from globe to globe, he and his kin, as a
bird flutters from branch to branch._”

           VOLTAIRE—Micromégas, Histoire Philosophique, 1752.


    [Illustration: NASA]

  National Aeronautics and Space Administration

  Jet Propulsion Laboratory
  California Institute of Technology
  Pasadena, California

JPL 400-100 12/80




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—Silently corrected a few palpable typos.

—Moved captions nearer the relevant images; tweaked image references
  within captions accordingly.

—Added a Table of Contents.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Voyager 1 Encounters Saturn, by 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VOYAGER 1 ENCOUNTERS SATURN ***

***** This file should be named 56205-0.txt or 56205-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/2/0/56205/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

