The Project Gutenberg eBook, The First Report of the Horncastle Teetotal
Society, 1843, by Anonymous


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The First Report of the Horncastle Teetotal Society, 1843


Author: Anonymous



Release Date: December 20, 2016  [eBook #53776]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIRST REPORT OF THE HORNCASTLE
TEATOTAL SOCIETY, 1843***


Transcribed from the 1843 D. Cussons edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                                   THE
                               FIRST REPORT
                                  OF THE
                                HORNCASTLE
                             TEETOTAL SOCIETY


                            ESTABLISHED, 1836.

                                * * * * *

                               HORNCASTLE:
                   Printed by D. Cussons, Market-place.
                                  1843.
                                ONE PENNY.

                                * * * * *




_Statement of Accounts from February_ 1842 _to February_ 1843.

                          RECEIVED.                                                     PAID.
                                             £      s.      d.                                       £      s.      d.
To Balance in Treasurer’s hands              3       7       8  By Expences of Tea Meeting          18      15      1½
To Proceeds of Tea Meeting                  16      17       0  By Advocates’ Salaries and          10       8       0
                                                                Expences
To Amount of Collection                      0      18       2  By Rent of School Room               1       5       0
To Subscriptions and Donations               9       1       4  By Printing and Postage              1       1       5
To Proceeds from Mr. Grubb’s Lecture         2       3       6  By Town Crier                        0      18       6
To Balance due to the Treasurer              2       4      9½  By Candles                           0      16       5
                                                                By Rent of Committee Room            1       8       0
                                           £34      12      5½                                     £34      13      5½

REPORT.


THE Committer of the Horncastle Tee-total Society have great pleasure in
bringing before the public their first printed Report, and are grateful
to acknowledge the success which has attended their labours, in connexion
with other friends of the Temperance cause; and notwithstanding the
opposition they have had to contend with, the cause is still progressing
in numbers, and exercising a mighty influence on the social and domestic
habits of the community at large.

The first public meeting to explain the principles of total abstinence in
Horncastle, was held in the British School Room, in November, 1836, on
which occasion Mr. Biscombe Agent of the British Association for the
suppression of intemperance, delivered a lecture, when fifteen signed the
pledge.  On the first of June, John Hocking, the Birmingham Blacksmith,
delivered a second lecture in the old Methodist Chapel, which produced a
powerful impression on the minds of the hearers, a great number gave in
their names, and the society became regularly organized; and thus six
yean ago the foundation of this society was laid, and by the laborious
exertions, and untiring zeal of a few individuals, who with little
influence, and still less money, but with feelings of sympathy for
suffering humanity, applied themselves with ardour and perseverance to
propagate its principles, to improve and ameliorate the condition of
those, who, through the use of strong drink, were sunk into the lowest
depths of poverty and degradation, to which it was possible for human
nature to arrive, and also to raise an impassable barrier, to the
progress of what undoubtedly is the greatest curse that ever afflicted
this or any other country.  And it is owing to the valuable services of
those persons, who, in the face of the most determined opposition, and
the indifference of others from whom was expected better things, that
this society under the approbation of providence now holds its present
position and influence in the town and vicinity.

The committee have still cause to regret, that notwithstanding the flood
of light, and truth, and knowledge, which has issued from the press and
found its way into almost every nook and corner of our land, and the
testimonies of living witnesses in every direction, around us, there
still exists a great amount of ignorance, prejudice, and secret
opposition to the onward progress of this glorious and god-like
institution, proving too plainly that man is still a slave to interest
and appetite, but being fully persuaded that the principles of the
temperance cause are based on truth, which cannot be successfully
controverted, and having within its bosom, a great many of the most
eminent Ministers both in and out of the establishment, and medical
gentlemen of the highest authority; and also having outlived the violence
of many a storm and now being firmly established, they look forward to
the period when this society will not have to expend its money and its
energies in reclaiming the drunkard, but in preserving the rising
generation as they attain to years of discretion, from ever becoming
such.

The Horncastle Tee-Total Society numbers at present 530 Members, of which
300 are adults, and 230 juveniles, including a great many reclaimed
drunkards who have been raised from destitution and want, to a state of
happiness and enjoyment.

In laying before the public the claims of the temperance cause, in order
to secure a greater amount of their attention and support, the committee
scarcely know what farther motives to urge most likely to exert a
practical influence on their minds, which have not already been brought
forward both at public meetings, and by the circulation of tracts,
sermons, &c. by thousands, (the talent and production of eminent men)
called into existence by the temperance cause.  The experience of
millions in the United Kingdom prove to a demonstration that the use of
alcoholic drinks are unnecessary for the health and comfort of man; there
are sixty thousand of our fellow creatures, in this country alone every
year falling a prey, to the influence of this spirit upon their system,
and be it remembered their numbers are made up from those who boast of
their temperance, and would shudder at the thought of ever becoming
drunkards; see also the vast amount of poverty, disease, and destitution
which the prevalence of this evil entails upon millions of our fellow
countrymen which is not confined to the drunkard alone; there are also
fifty millions sterling annually spent without a murmur, producing crime
beyond calculation, when not the fiftieth part of that sum is raised by
all the benevolent and religious institutions together, for the lessening
of human woe, the circulation of the scriptures, and the evangelization
of the world: let us reverse the picture, and in this town we see homes
transformed from the abodes of wretchedness and misery to scenes of
comfort and happiness; we could name fifty who were victims of inebriety
in its worst forms, persons in every sphere of life once in the most
dreadful state of ignorance and brutality, now become sober, clothed,
fed, and in their right minds, attending places of worship instead of the
public house or taproom; _these are reasons_, which ought to weigh
powerfully on the minds of those who wish well to their fellow men, in
effectually bringing about a mighty co-operation, for the speedy
accomplishment of those happy results, which this society has in view.

Here is an object worthy the attention and employment of every one, and
in securing which, all distinctions and differences may be set aside,
here neither religious nor political sentiments need intervene to prevent
that union of effort which is required ere our principles are fully
secured, but every one may cast in their portion of assistance and
influence until the effort thus made, shall entirely sweep away from our
country, the chief, if not the greatest curse, that ever came upon it.

The Society (as will be seen by the cash account) is in arrears with the
Treasurer; an appeal will therefore be made to the public to enable the
committee to liquidate the same and meet the current expenses of the
society, as much greater effort requires to be made to put down
drunkenness which still abounds to a great extent.

_Annexed are the Testimonies of a few individuals_ (_in this town_, _and
well known to many_) _who once classed amongst the most degraded and
debased_,—_they are now trophies of our cause_, _and are commanding
respect and esteem in their respective localities many more might be
named if required_.

No. 1.  Robert Baildham, Sen., became a drunkard at 18 years of age,
owing to the example of an intemperate master, and continued a drunkard
for 33 years, so that himself and family were at times reduced to the
greatest distress and poverty, wanting the common necessaries of
life,—has been a Teetotaller nearly 7 years: he has now food and raiment,
a comfortable home, gained credit, and become a respectable member.

No. 2.  John Wright, never tasted ale until 34 years of age, afterwards
became a drunkard and continued so 18 years, having expended about £500,
depriving himself and family of the common necessaries of life, causing
them to suffer many deprivations,—has been a Teetotaller 3 years, and is
now possessing every enjoyment a working man can desire.

No. 3.  William Markwell, commenced a seafaring life at the age of 18
years, learnt to drink, and became a drunkard, which course he followed
more or less until he was 60 years old, during that long period he set
all at defiance, his character is too well known to need further
description, suffice it to say he has been a Teetotaller upwards of 6
years, he is content and comfortable in his circumstances, and enjoys
better health than he did for 20 years previous.

No. 4.  James Taylor, for a length of time given to drink has been a
Teetotaller 4 years, consequently has become a respectable man.

No. 5.  William Jordan, Thomas, Jordan, William Turner, Thomas Heath,
James Barker, Christopher Hunter, and John Towell, Brick-makers, in Mr.
Harrison’s Yard, were all drunkards, some of them to a great extent,
spending their time and money in public houses, to the injury of their
families and the annoyance of their employer,—have now been Teetotallers
6 years, and not a gill of ale has been in the yard since.  Themselves
and families are comfortable, enjoying good health; and following a most
laborious employment.




SUBSCRIPTIONS.

Sir Henry Dymoke, Baronet                         £2  0_s._    0_d._
                      s.      d.                           s.       d.
Allison, E.            4       0  Wright, J.                4        0
Sissons, W.            2       0  Carter, R.                2        0
Simpson, C.            2       0  Stainforth                3        0
Evison, C.             2       0  Coviller, J.              6        0
Cussons, J.            2       0  Jackson, T.               1        0
Addelsee, W.           2       0  Wood, W.                  6        0
Jordan, W. sen.        6       0  Darby, W.                 2        6
Jordan, W. jun.        1       0  Hickson, J.               6        0
Elam, J.               1       0  Pocklington, H.           2        0
Birch                  1       0  East, M.                  4        0
Heath, T.              1       0  A Friend                  4        0
Stephenson, G.         1       0  Daubney, W.               6        0
Stephenson, E.         1       0  Pain, Rev. J.             4        0
Stephenson, E.         1       0  Ashton, J.                2        0
Keightly, M.           2       0  Ashton, S.                2        0
Hird H.                2       0  Tupholme, T.              1        0
Barnes, E.             1       0  Blakey, W.                1        0
Evison, J.             1       0  Henson, T.                2        0
Moody, E.              2       0  Whitton, G.               2        6
Cutforth, R.           1       0  Whelpton, R.              2        0
Coppin, E.             1       0  Sellwood, H. Esq.         2        6
Hanson, J.             2       0  Kent, W. R.               1        0
Hairby                 2       0  Wright, G.                1        0
Blow, J.               1       0  Glazier, J.               0        6
Farbon, J.             2       0  Hotchin, W.               0        6
Nicholson, R.          3       0  Lenton, J.                1        0
Clarke, T.             6       0  Smith, (Draper)           1        0
Johnson S.             2       0  Overton, T.               1        0
Fowler, T.             1       0  Hill, W.                  0        6
Coppin, W.             1       0  Slater, J.                0        6
Maltby, R.             1       0  Hogg                      1        0
Farbon, L.             2       0  Gainsley, J.              2        6
Kent, S.               1       0  Donations                 2        4
Gainsley, S.           1       0

                                            [Cussons, Printer, Horncastle.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FIRST REPORT OF THE HORNCASTLE
TEETOTAL SOCIETY, 1843***


******* This file should be named 53776-0.txt or 53776-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/3/7/7/53776


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

