Project Gutenberg's The Use and Abuse of Church Bells, by Walter Blunt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll
have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using
this ebook.



Title: The Use and Abuse of Church Bells
       With Practical Suggestions concerning Them

Author: Walter Blunt

Release Date: April 13, 2019 [EBook #59272]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE USE AND ABUSE OF CHURCH BELLS ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Books
project.)










                                   THE
                              USE AND ABUSE
                                   OF
                            THE CHURCH BELLS,
                                  WITH
                 Practical Suggestions concerning them.

                                   BY
                           WALTER BLUNT, A.M.,
                     A PRIEST OF THE ENGLISH CHURCH.

                                 LONDON:
                   JOSEPH MASTERS, ALDERSGATE STREET.
                               MDCCCXLVI.

                                 LONDON:
                       PRINTED BY JOSEPH MASTERS,
                           ALDERSGATE STREET.




THE USE AND ABUSE OF THE CHURCH BELLS.


It has fallen to the writer’s lot, in the Divine dispensation, to be
entrusted with the care, or joint care, of very many parishes in various
parts of England: and he knows not any one external matter, common to
them all, and to the neighbourhoods surrounding them, which has caused
him more pain than the ordinary use, and the almost utter neglect for
their own proper purposes, of the Church Bells.

Indeed, so much is the proper use of these holy instruments of
edification (for such they really are) generally lost sight of, that
among all the New Churches which have been builded during the last few
years, scarcely any have more than _one_ Bell; a greater number being
considered a vain superfluity, a kind of ecclesiastical luxury—or, by
deeper thinkers, a link between the Church and the _world_ (and that
often in its fiercest contentions, vainest hours, and most carnal aspect)
which we may well be rid of.

In our older Churches, the position of the Belfry (on the floor of the
Church, immediately communicating with the Nave, generally laid entirely
open to it, often, too, having no other entrance, and not unfrequently
forming the passage between the Nave and Chancel) is sufficient to point
out to every thinking person in the parish the very sacred character
which was attached to their Bells when they were first hung, the holy
purposes to which they were dedicated—and how solemn a matter, how truly
a service of ALMIGHTY GOD, the Ringing of them was then esteemed.

In other Churches, almost always of a later date, we find the original
position of the Ringers at a higher level, upon a floor in the Tower.
But the Belfry was still laid open, by an arch, to the body of the
Church—thus yielding evidence that the Ringing of the Bells was still
esteemed a very sacred thing.

In many Churches of more recent foundation, but chiefly in such as have
been builded within the last 200 years, we meet with a sad evidence of
a decay of this feeling, or rather _principle_; in that the Belfry is
placed high up in the Tower, and quite shut out from the body of the
Church:—until, at last, it has come to pass (and this, too, is the case
in some Churches, of 150 years old) that the Belfry is most frequently
entirely omitted; and Churches of considerable size and pretensions are
erected with only a single Call-Bell.

But while this result has been coming to pass—(and it has been not a
little hastened by mercenary hearts and sacrilegious hands, in the
robbery of many of our older Churches of their Bells) another change has
gradually been taking place of a still more mischievous character. In
various records which have come down to us, bearing date about the times
of the Reformation, reference is often made to, and sufficient evidence
is given of, the superstitious usage of Church Bells: and there is, too,
room for but little doubt that they, as well as the Church itself, were
in those later ages frequently applied to profane purposes.

Again, the Rules and doggrel verses (generally from one to two hundred
years old) which remain in many of our Belfries, while they often show
that the Bells were still used for holy purposes, and according to their
original design, afford alas! a melancholy evidence that the Ringing of
them was no longer esteemed a sacred service.

Toward the latter half of the last century—(that worst age of the English
Church) the Ringing of the Church Bells became a fashionable amusement
among the Yeomanry and Gentry, and was degraded to the level on which the
hurdle-race and steeple-chase now stand;—and while their sweet voices
were seldom heard for any holy purpose, they were made continually to
wake the echoes of the neighbourhood, in no more noble cause, for no more
sacred object, than the battue-shooting of the present day.

This amusement, however, at any rate in most parts of the country, has
long ago “become vulgar” and “gone out of fashion”:—till at last our
Belfries—though dedicated to GOD’S service—are left in a state of filthy
dilapidation, receptacles for dirt and rubbish of all kinds, and very
frequently the drinking-place of the most profane and profligate persons
in the parish; who—totally ignorant of the sacred character, and Heavenly
uses, of those holy instruments they are desecrating—ring the Bells for
their amusement, amid oaths and obscenity, and sell their voices, for
drink-money, for any worldly purpose—who ring “the muffled” or “the merry
peal” for the rich man’s sorrow or rejoicing, but never send forth a
sound of unbought sympathy with the poor.

Far better would it be than this that our Bells should be altogether
soundless—or that our Towers (as is generally the case with modern
Churches) should possess but one.

It is to point out the proper use of the Church Bells—and how very
beneficial may be their influence when rightly put forth, what powerful
coadjutors they may be made to the pastoral office—and also to give to
his brother clergy the benefit (such as it is) of his own experience in
the management of them,—that the writer has put together the following
brief observations and suggestions: but, concerning which, he would
humbly and earnestly express a hope that no one will act upon them,
until he can himself realize the Church’s system on which they are
grounded. It would be far better that one who (from whatever cause) is
not endeavouring to spread practical holiness among his people, according
to the Church’s method, (which such as have tried it, and other methods,
well know to be the only successful one)—it would be far better that he
should be content with silencing the Bells altogether, or preventing them
being rung on improper occasions, than that he should introduce a system
into his parish, which, in such a case, would be an _unreal_ one—and, as
such, would be hurtful, instead of beneficial to his flock.

In the ordinarily received formularies and Canons of the English
Church—I mean those which have been put forward subsequent to her
Reformation—there is not much special notice of the Church-Bells to be
found. At the period of the Reformation, and for some time after, the
use seems to have been generally understood and acted upon; and thus
“a law of custom” superseded the necessity of any written law. Little,
therefore, in the way of positive command was enacted, except for the
abolition of certain evil habits which had grown up. Those notices,
however, which do occur in the laws of our Church during the last two
hundred and fifty years, are quite sufficient to show that she _now_
recognizes their ancient holy uses, and no others.

_Preface to the Book of Common Prayer._

    “And all Priests and Deacons are to say daily the Morning and
    Evening Prayer, either privately or openly, not being let
    by sickness or some other urgent cause. And the Curate that
    ministereth in every parish church or chapel, being at home,
    and not being otherwise reasonably hindered, shall say the same
    in the parish church or chapel where he ministereth, and shall
    cause a Bell to be tolled thereunto a convenient time before he
    begin, that the people may come to hear GOD’S Word, and to pray
    with him.”

_Canon LXVII._, 1603-4.

    “ ... And when any is passing out of this life, a Bell shall be
    tolled, and the Minister shall not then slack to do his last
    duty. And after the party’s death, if it so fall out, there
    shall be rung no more than one short peal, and one other before
    the burial, and one other after the burial.”

_Canon LXXXVIII._, 1603-4.

    “The Churchwardens or Questmen, and their Assistants, shall
    suffer no plays, feasts, banquets, suppers, church-ales,
    drinkings, temporal courts, or leets, lay-juries, musters, or
    any other profane usage, to be kept in the church, chapel, or
    churchyard, neither the Bells to be rung superstitiously upon
    Holy-Days or Eves abrogated by the Book of Common Prayer, nor
    at any other times, without good cause, to be allowed by the
    Minister of the place, and by themselves.”

The Belfry is a part of the Church,—and is, as is the rest of the Church,
dedicated to GOD—any profane use of the Belfry, or any use of it for
common worldly purposes, any unholy, light, irreverent conduct there, is
a direct sin against GOD—a breaking of the Third Commandment.

The Bells are to the whole parish what a Church Organ is to an assembled
congregation. They wake up the heart’s affections, and lead us in our
praises to GOD.—But they have a holy use and purpose of still broader
character:—They call us to the Church, and tell us it is time for public
Prayer, and bid all come who can—They warn, too, those who cannot come,
that it is prayer-time now, that they may raise their hearts with us, and
wish that they were with us, and send their desires heavenward, and have
direct communion with us in our prayers, though absent in the body—They
preach to all continually of death and Judgment, of Heaven and Hell,—and
while they invite the willing, they warn those who will not come—They
remind us all, amid our busy occupations, twice every day, that this is
not our continuing city, that we are but pilgrims and sojourners upon
earth; and while they warn the slothful Christian, thus continually, to
“gird up his loins” and haste heavenwards, they preach to those who never
hear another preacher, and tell them of a Judgment to come. Again,—They
wake the heart to gladness on all the Holy Feast Days of the Church,
loudly calling upon us to “rejoice in the LORD”; and in times of fasting
and humiliation,—eloquent by their silence or by their mournful sounds,
they call us to penitence and sorrow. Again,—If any of our neighbours,
rich or poor, be joined together by Holy Church in marriage, the Bells
ring out their cheerful peal of joy, bidding us all to raise up our
hearts in thanksgiving with our brethren (whose marriage “represents unto
us the mystical union which is betwixt CHRIST and His Church”)—for that
“marriage is honourable in all men,” and “if one member be honoured, all
the members rejoice.” Again,—When any is passing out of this life, the
“Passing Bell” is tolled, acquainting us with that awful circumstance,
warning us that our own time may even now be at hand, and calling upon us
to pray for our departing brother, that in this “his hour of death the
Good LORD may deliver him,” and “not suffer him, for any pains of death,
to fall from GOD,”—that one and all of us, Minister and people, whether
present with our suffering brother or absent from him, may put up to GOD,
in his and in our own behalf, “the Commendatory Prayer for a Sick Person
at the point of departure,” which is provided for us in our Prayer Book,
at the end of the service for “the Visitation of the Sick.” And when the
soul is departed and delivered from this death-bearing body, the Bells
ring out in notes of solemn cheerfulness their peal of chastened joy,
calling us to thankfulness for our brother’s deliverance from trial and
difficulty and peril—this sinful, tempting, ever dangerous world. And
when the body of our brother is being carried to its resting place, to be
laid up in safety for the Resurrection, and after, too, it is deposited
in the tomb, the Bells ring out again their note of praise, bidding us
to “sorrow not as those that have no hope,” for that “the soul of him
which has departed hence in the LORD, is now in joy and felicity,” and
that “this corruptible _body_ shall put on incorruption;”—reminding us
that with respect to him we have neither time nor cause for grief—that
we must one and all of us return each to the diligent performance of the
hard-handed duties of his own position,—and that while we “work out our
own salvation, with fear and trembling” with reference to ourselves,—with
reference to him we may “go on our way rejoicing.”

Thus holy are the Church Bells—and thus great is their holy usefulness
to us. If, therefore, they are used for any common purposes—if upon
occasions of mere worldly joy—if when the Church would call us all to
gladness, her bells are made to sound the note of sorrow—if their sweet
voices should be bought and sold, loudly proclaiming the rich man’s weal
or woe, and silent or almost silent about CHRIST’S poor—then is their
usefulness destroyed, their holy purpose abolished or reversed, and a
grievous sin is committed against the Church, and against GOD to Whom
they are dedicated.

But of the Ringers—the Bells are dumb without them. It is they who
enable the Bells to put forth their solemn sound, and tune them to their
various purposes. How holy, therefore, is the Ringers’ office! How
deeply religious is the service of such men! How careful should they
be about their manner of ringing! How sinful must any carelessness of
ringing be! How very sinful any levity of behaviour in the performance of
their duties! And,—inasmuch as no one can occupy a holy office without
incurring a largely increased responsibility for the attainment of
individual holiness; and no one who does not become better by exercising
or holding a holy office can fail of becoming worse—how very careful
should all who are in authority be about the appointment and the conduct
of the Ringers! How very watchful should the Ringers be of their own
lives and conversation!

_Suggestions_—

    1. That the Belfry should be carefully kept as clean, and in
    as good repair (both substantial and ornamental) as any other
    part of the Church. And that it should be decorated with Texts
    of Scripture and other appropriate ornaments.—If possible, the
    Belfry should be open to the body of the Church—or at the most
    divided from it by a low open skreen: for any other arrangement
    will be found very inconvenient for the due performance of the
    Ringers’ duty, and will add to any difficulty which may exist
    in realizing the sanctity of the place.

    2. That no person except the Ringers and other officers of the
    Church be permitted, at any time, to enter the Belfry, without
    the leave of the Minister or Churchwardens.

    3. That no person except the Ringers be permitted at any time
    to sound any of the Bells, without the special permission of
    the Minister.

    4. That the Ringers be appointed by the Minister and
    Churchwardens; and hold their office during good conduct.

    5. That the Ringers be regarded as a part of _the general
    Choir_, and be placed in all things on an equality with it.

    6. That two companies of Ringers be appointed—each company
    being equal in number to the Bells—the one company being the
    regular Ringers, performing and being responsible for all
    regular duty, and enjoying all emoluments—the other being a
    supplemental company, out of which any vacancy which may occur
    in the first company shall be filled up, and any member of
    which may be employed by any member of the first company to
    supply his place during any necessary absence.

    7. That one member of each company of Ringers, appointed by the
    Minister and Churchwardens, be held responsible for the conduct
    of the company in the Belfry: and report to the Minister and
    Churchwardens any ill conduct (whether in or out of the Belfry)
    of any member of his company, which may come to his knowledge.

    8. That the use of the Bells be confined strictly to
    Ecclesiastical purposes.

    9. That a list or table of the days and times and occasions of
    ringing, signed by the Minister and Churchwardens, be suspended
    in the Belfry and in the Church Porch:—with a statement that
    no occasion mentioned therein is to be omitted, but upon the
    direction of the Minister; and no occasion is to be added
    thereto, but upon the joint direction of the Minister and
    Churchwardens.

    10. That the ringing table should contain the following rules:—

        _a._ That a Bell should be tolled (for a quarter of an
        hour) before Morning and Evening Prayer—according to the
        direction of the Prayer Book.

        _b._ That the Bells should be chimed for a stated time,
        before the use of the service for the Holy Communion.

        _c._ That the Bells should be rung in peal, for a quarter
        of an hour and no more, after every Marriage.

        _d._ That the great Bell should be tolled, according to the
        Canon, (for a quarter of an hour) when any is passing out
        of this life, or appears to be dying.

        _e._ That the Bells should be rung, according to the Canon,
        in a steady, solemn, though cheerful peal, for five minutes
        and no more, as soon as may be after the death. Which
        particular peal should be kept strictly for this purpose,
        and never applied to any other.

        _f._ That the Bells should be rung or chimed, according to
        the Canon, in a steady, grave, and solemn, though cheerful
        peal (kept strictly for this purpose) for ten minutes
        before every Burial.

        _g._ That the Bells should be rung, according to the Canon,
        in a steady, solemn, though more cheerful peal (kept
        strictly for this purpose) for five minutes after every
        Burial.[1]

        _h._ That the Bells should be rung in peal at early morning
        (for a quarter of an hour) and at other specified times,
        on every LORD’S day, and on every other Festival commanded
        by the Church to be kept holy, and on the day of the
        dedication of the Parish Church.

        _i._ That the Bells be not rung in peal (except the death
        and burial peals) for any purpose, on any Friday in the
        year, except it be Christmas day;—nor in the season of
        Lent, except upon the LORD’S day and the Feast of the
        Annunciation.

        _j._ That at the opening of Christmas day, the Feast of The
        Circumcision, The Feast of The Epiphany, The Feast of The
        Purification, (Presentation of CHRIST in the Temple), The
        Feast of The Annunciation (Incarnation), Easter day, The
        Feast of The Ascension, and The Feast of Pentecost, the
        Bells should be rung in peal, for five minutes, at Midnight.

        _k._ That on Fridays and other Fasting days the great and
        little Bell should be rung together, in alternate toll,
        for a quarter of an hour at early morning, and at other
        specified times.

        _l._ That in order that they may have opportunity of
        practice, a special quarter or half hour be appointed, on
        each Festival, for the second company of Ringers to ring in
        peal.

    11. That, in order to prevent any mercenary use of the Bells,
    or any difference being made between Rich and Poor, with
    respect to them, and in order to secure a fair remuneration to
    the Ringers, a regular definite yearly salary should be paid to
    the first company of Ringers; and no Ringer should be permitted
    to receive any payment or gratuity for the performance of his
    duty, on any special occasion.

Very beneficial results have been obtained from the following out of this
system; and it has become evident to those who have tried it, that the
more perfectly it is carried out, so, much more than in due proportion,
are the benefits. Indeed, after the first difficulties are overcome, it
is much easier to carry out the _whole_ system than a _part_ of it—for,
when in action, as a whole, it has a completeness and consistency and
beauty which approves it to the minds of thinking persons generally—of
those even, who from circumstances, are a “not well affected to the
Church.”

Perhaps the most difficult part of the system to carry out, or rather
to begin upon, in some places, would be the Church’s rule concerning
ringing at a death and before and after a burial; and yet in some parts
of the Midland, Western and Northern Counties this rule is, and always
has been, complied with. Not, indeed, for _all_—for the poor _cannot
pay the Ringers_! and the rich consider it “vulgar”!!—but for yeomen and
tradespeople; and in other parts of the country, _e.g._ in Cornwall,
the doggrel verses which are found in the Belfries, bear witness that
the observance of the rule was maintained up to no very distant period.
However, people generally have such heathenish notions concerning death
and burial that the great majority of them, in almost every parish,
would require much instruction concerning them, according to the tone of
our praise-breathing Burial Service, before they could be expected to
understand and appreciate the Church’s rule with respect to her Bells
on these occasions. If, however, careful explanation were tenderly and
lovingly given, and the peals for the several occasions properly and
judiciously chosen, _and carefully kept for those occasions only_, so
that “the trumpet” should not at any time “give an uncertain sound,”—it
would soon be found that the observance of the rule is greatly conducive
in spreading and deepening more Christian principles and feelings
concerning death.

It is true that occasions might occur, and that not unfrequently in many
parishes, when the sound of thanksgiving for the death of one for whom
he could have but little hope, would grate harshly upon the Clergyman’s
ear, and wake up strange contending feelings in his heart. But surely
the sound of thanksgiving from the Church tower cannot be inappropriate
when the words of thanksgiving from the Priest’s own mouth, in the Burial
Service, are not so; and it would not only be possible, but greatly
beneficial to the parish, (both in its immediate effect, and as paving
the way for a return to a more complete system of Christian discipline)
to silence the Bells on particular occasions, and forbid the accustomed
sound of public thanksgiving, on the departure of such as had lived
unholy lives.[2]

Another difficulty which will be likely to present itself in many places,
is the provision of a fixed yearly salary for the Ringers. But the
difficulty, however great, is as nothing in proportion to the benefits
which will accrue. And while the accomplishment of the object is worth
any effort and almost any sacrifice, the difficulty will seldom be found
so great as it may at first sight appear.

In a parish which had six Bells, where the price of labour was at about
the average rate in country towns, where the population was between four
and five thousand, the great majority of which were Church people, and
where there was a double daily service, (without which I do not suppose
that the system would do much, if any good)—the whole annual expense was
less than £19. But it is evident that the expense would be different
for different parishes: in fact, for one fixed element in calculating
the expense there are three variable elements. The fixed element is the
number of ordinary days and Holy Days in the year. The variable elements
are, 1, the ordinary price of labour in the parish: 2, the number of
Bells: 3, the average number of Marriages and Burials—which must of
course be dependent upon the number and character of the population.

In making a calculation of the proper amount of salary, the price of
labour should, for obvious reasons, be reckoned higher than that usually
paid in the parish, and the number of Marriages and Burials at above the
average, in cases where _all_ have not been brought to Church; inasmuch
as any such return to consistent holy practice, if done in a Christian
loving manner, is sure to win the affections of the people.

For raising the required amount, whatever it may be, a well-affected
parish would doubtless contribute something from its “Rates”—if not
_all_, as the law requires it to do. There might also be a collection at
the Offertory, once or twice a year, for the purpose:—and there might be
“a Ringers’ Box” placed in the Church, under the lock and care of the
Minister and Churchwardens, to receive contributions of “the faithful”
toward defraying the expenses of this part of Divine worship.—Lastly, in
parishes which are moderately well endowed, the Priest may well take it
into consideration, whether he may not duteously and beneficially devote
some _small_ portion, at any rate, of the income which is entrusted to
him for the furtherance of the spiritual well-being of his flock, to the
honour of GOD and the welfare of His people, in this so very important
branch of His service.

[1] There is evidence that in the Sixteenth Century one hour was not too
long for the short peal after the death, and half an hour for that at
the burial; but the writer has found from experience that a much shorter
time is now advisable, at any rate in commencing the system.

[2] On all such occasions the friends of the deceased would have
opportunity of appeal to the Bishop, and the Clergyman would be open to
censure for any improper exercise of authority.




TRACTS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


In 12mo. Price One Shilling.

THE ENGLISH CHURCH AND THE ROMISH HERESY.

Edwards and Hughes, Ave Maria Lane.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 12mo. Price Threepence.

CONFIRMATION, OR THE LAYING ON OF HANDS, Catechetically explained
according to the Formularies of the English Church.

W. J. Cleaver, Baker Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

In 12mo. cloth, Price 1s. 6d. (Published upon the request of the Author).

AIDS TO A HOLY LIFE, in Forms for Self-Examination, general and
particular, with an Introduction, explaining the manner in which the duty
should be performed. By the late THOMAS H. B. BUND, A.M., a Priest of the
English Church.

W. J. Cleaver, Baker Street.




NEW WORKS IN COURSE OF PUBLICATION BY J. MASTERS, ALDERSGATE STREET


SERMONS FOR SUNDAYS, FESTIVALS, FASTS, AND OTHER LITURGICAL OCCASIONS.
Contributed by Bishops and other Clergy of the Church. Edited by the Rev.
ALEXANDER WATSON, M.A., Curate of St. John’s, Cheltenham.

The FIRST SERIES, complete in One Volume, contains Thirty-six Original
Sermons, and may be had in Six Parts, price One Shilling each, or bound
in cloth, 7s. 6d.

The FIRST VOLUME OF THE SECOND SERIES contains Sermons for every Sunday
and Holy Day (_inclusive_) from ADVENT TO THE FIFTH SUNDAY IN LENT, price
7s. 6d. cloth boards, or in Six Parts, price 1s. each.

The SECOND VOLUME contains Sermons for every Sunday and Holy Day
(_inclusive_) from PALM SUNDAY TO THE FOURTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY, price
7s. 6d. bound in cloth, or in Six Parts, price 1s. each.

Part XIII., commencing the Third Volume, contains Sermons for the Sundays
and Holy Days from ST. PETER’S DAY TO THE SEVENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY.

Parts XIV. and XV., (to be published on the First of August,) will
contain Sermons for the Sundays and Holy Days from the EIGHTH TO THE
FIFTEENTH SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ECCLESIASTIC; a Magazine relating to the Affairs of the Church,
Education, &c.

The FIRST VOLUME, price 10s. 6d., bound in cloth, is now ready. A
Prospectus, with a List of the Articles, may be had on application to the
Publisher.

No. VII., commencing Vol. II. contains, Thoughts on the Study of
Theology.—The See of the Circumcision.—Missionary Tourists: Perceval and
Abbott.—A Voice from Dream-Land.—The Ecclesiastical Chant—Mr. Jelf’s
Sermon before the University of Oxford.—Church Spoilers and their Doom,
&c., &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ECCLESIOLOGIST. Published by the Ecclesiological late Cambridge
Camden Society.

The First Volume of the New Series, with Four Engravings, price 8s.
bound, may still be had.

Volume II., with Three Engravings, is now ready, price 8s. 6d. bound.

No. XIII., New Series, contains, The Ecclesiastical Architecture of
Ireland.—Ecclesiological London.—Comparative Table of the Architectural
Styles of the Cathedrals of France.—The Dedications of the French
Cathedrals.—Meetings of the Ecclesiological late Cambridge Camden Society
and Oxford Architectural Society.—Review, Ecclesiological Notes, New
Churches, Church Restorations, Notices, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

In demy 8vo., price 1s., or 1s. 4d. post free.

ANGLICAN ORDINATIONS VALID. A Refutation of certain Statements in the
Second and Third Chapters of “the Validity of Anglican Ordinations. By
the Very Reverend Peter Richard Kenrick, V.G.” By JOHN FULLER RUSSELL,
B.C.L., Incumbent of St. James’s, Enfield.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Use and Abuse of Church Bells, by Walter Blunt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE USE AND ABUSE OF CHURCH BELLS ***

***** This file should be named 59272-0.txt or 59272-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/9/2/7/59272/

Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned
images of public domain material from the Google Books
project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

